<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
            <p>In itself the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i> needs little comment or explanation. It is a beautiful play. The harshest critics of Euripides admit its fine unity of construction, its sincere drawing of character, and its classic restraint. One might also remark on the singular skill with which the superhuman influences typified by Aphrodite and Artemis are wrought into the web of natural human action. But to the student of drama the play does present one curious problem, a problem of the relation of copies to originals, or later versions to earlier.</p>
            <p>It has served as a model, with occasional close verbal borrowings, to two famous later tragedies, Seneca’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Phaedra</i> and Racine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Phédre</i>. Both plays have been greatly admired, and both show a determination to outbid their Greek original in dramatic effect. Seneca indeed may almost be said to treat it in the spirit of a modern commercial manager. “A fine plot,” one can imagine him saying, “but for a modern audience it needs enlivening; it needs more invention, more incidents, stronger curtains.” He sets to work to improve it.</p>
            <p>First of all, obviously, the gods must go. A modern audience is not interested in gods. Then, Euripides has neglected the obvious <i  xml:lang="fr">scène à faire</i>—Phaedra’s declaration of love to Hippolytus. His hero and heroine never so much as speak to each other, and even the Nurse’s proposals take place off the stage. Such propriety is surely excessive. The theatre demands a good strong Phaedra—Hippolytus scene, effectively prepared. Consequently Seneca gives us first a Nurse—Hippolytus dialogue in very general terms, the Nurse urging that young men should enjoy their youth, Hippolytus extolling chastity and the wild woods, and finally cursing all women. Phaedra, who has been eagerly waiting, enters in time to hear these last words and, in her despair, faints. Hippolytus catches her as she is falling, and she wakes to find herself in his arms. Situation!</p>
            <p>From this vantage point she proceeds to woo the embarrassed and unsuspecting young man; tells of her present unhappiness, and her intense unsatisfied love for Theseus—as he once was, “young, beautiful, virginal; like you!” Hippolytus at last understands, and in fury draws his sword upon her. “Yes,” she cries: “that is how I wish to die, by your hand, in your arms. <i  xml:lang="la">Nunc me compotem voti facis.</i>” Hippolytus flings the sword away in disgust and flies to his wild woods. The Nurse, returning, finds Phaedra dumb with despair, and sees that all is lost unless... “<i  xml:lang="la">Scelere velandum est scelus.</i> Accuse him before he can accuse us! —Ho! Help! Help! Hippolytus has tried to ravish the Queen, and threatened her with his sword.” Attendants rush in. Curtain!</p>
            <p>When, after the next chorus, Theseus returns—haggard and heroic from the realm of Hades—Phaedra repels him. She is unworthy to receive his embraces. She must die. “Why so?” She will not speak. “I must know,” says Theseus: “if you are obstinate I will put your Nurse to the torture.” Rather than permit that, Phaedra speaks, “I have been assaulted.” “By whom?” “I will never say; but there is his sword.” The sword is recognised. Hippolytus has fled. His guilt seems all too clear, and Theseus utters the fatal curse. In the next act, when the curse is duly fulfilled and Hippolytus slain (by a much magnified and improved sea-monster), Phaedra appears above the doorway with the sword in her hand, confesses all, and stabs herself. All first-rate theatrical stuff! Why could not Euripides have thought of it? Had he no sense of the theatre?</p>
            <p>The curious thing is that, according to such evidence as we have, not very abundant but fairly decisive, he did think of this sort of thing, tried it, and then deliberately threw it away. He saw on reflection that his drama would gain by greater restraint and simplicity. And no doubt it has gained in dignity, beauty, and depth of meaning, and perhaps even in dramatic effect.</p>
            <p>Three or four ancient writers mention an earlier version of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i> which was considered “unseemly” or “unsuitable” by classical Greek taste. It was called “the Veil-face Hippolytus,” presumably from some stronger development of the face-veiling incident at v. 947; the present play was “the Garland Hippolytus” evidently with reference to the “wreathéd garland” in v. 87. The ancient argument of our play, for instance, says: “This is the second, or, as it is called, the ‘Garland’ Hippolytus. That it is a later version is clear in the text; what was unseemly and open to reproach has been corrected.” The earlier play has perished except for some twenty “fragments,” that is, passages stated or credibly conjectured to be quotations from it. It contained apparently, among other incidents, the scene of Phaedra’s declaration of love to Hippolytus, an attack by her on Theseus for his old infidelities, and a return of Theseus not merely from “abroad,” but from Hades. Presumably Seneca took the earlier Hippolytus as his model, though we may be sure that no Greek tragedy of the fifth century <abbr epub:type="se:era z3998:initialism">BC</abbr> could possibly have risen—or fallen, or contorted itself—into the ingenious extravagances of the silver-age Roman rhetorician.</p>
            <p>Liveliness, epigram, variety, ingenuity, richness in incident, are all good qualities in literature, but they are dangerous in tragedy and fatal to the greatest tragedy. Who would wish the Book of Job to be cleverer, or the plot of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Paradise Lost</i> to be made more lively and exciting? The theme of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i>, as it stands, is simple and eternal. There is such a Power as Cypris in the world; there is, much less conspicuous and violent but hardly less real, such a Power as Artemis. They do make human lives their playthings. That is what the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i> makes us feel as we see the unconscious victims of these forces acting as they naturally would or must act.</p>
            <p>Seneca was a consummate master of rhetoric in a period of bad taste. Racine was a great poet and dramatist in a famous period about which judgments differ. In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Phédre</i> he followed Seneca’s lead. He dropped the goddesses; he adopted the scene of Phaedra’s declaration of love, the sword business, the infidelities of Theseus, the repentance and suicide. He further made the plot quite different and far more complex by inventing Aricie, a young princess beloved by Hippolytus, and thus adding motives of jealousy to Phaedra’s other emotional complications, and, further, by developing the Hades story into a false report of Theseus’ death. This report not only gives Phaedra an unexpected freedom, but also produces a political crisis with three rival claimants to the throne, Phaedra’s son, Hippolytus himself, and Aricie, who belongs to an expelled branch of the royal family. The interwoven threads become irrelevant to the main theme and consequently a little tiresome. We have wandered far from the simple theme of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i>, the two eternal forces playing havoc with human life.</p>
			<p>One cannot but notice also that, as with so many modern treatments of Greek stories, the cutting out of the super-natural element is incomplete and leaves behind it a sort of discord. While gods are at work behind the scenes, as in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i>, the Three Prayers and the mysterious Sea Bull are in their right atmosphere. When the gods are removed and our attention is concentrated on a masterly realistic picture of a somewhat morbid woman in love, we do not expect a sudden entrance of supernatural curses and horned dragons. ‘There is lovely verse in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Phédre</i>; there is subtle psychology; there is dramatic skill and power. Yet, to me, in coming to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Phédre</i> after the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i> there is a sense of irrecoverable loss, the loss of a quality of which Racine himself was capable and which he perhaps attained in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Athalie</i>.</p>
			<p>Our evidence is not conclusive, but if we can trust it Euripides did in the second <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i> a thing so rare as to be almost unique in literature. The rule of the tradition is that a later version regularly outbids or over-elaborates the earlier. A simple example is given in one of Conington’s essays. Homer says he could not name all the Greeks who went to Troy, not though he had ten tongues and ten mouths (B 486). Vergil for a similar undertaking thinks a hundred insufficient: <i xml:lang="la">non mihi si linguae centum sint, oraque centum, ferrea vox</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Georgics</i> II. V. 43). While certain later imitators are not content with a thousand. That is the normal procedure. One may see it here in Seneca and Racine, or again in Dryden’s re-writing of Shakespeare. It is an extraordinary instance of Greek Sophrosynê in art that Euripides should actually have made his second <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i> simpler and less sensational than his first. One possible explanation suggests itself. The subject of his play pretty certainly came to Euripides from a local folk-tale attached to the sacred Tomb of Hippolytus in Trozên, a story like that of Joseph and Potiphar’s wife in Genesis 39, of Bellerophon and Anteia in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Iliad</i> (VI. 160), of Peleus and the wife of Acastus in Pindar (Nem. IV. 57). It is a well-known type; one of those traditional tales of “brides frail and faithless” which the Chorus in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Medea</i> promise to make an end of, as soon as women come by their rights (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Med</i>. 421 <abbr>>ff.</abbr>). These stories are apt to have just the incidents which gave offence in the first <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hippolytus</i>; the woman regularly makes overtures to the man, is rejected by him, and then uses some garment or possession of his to back up her false accusation. It looks as if Euripides began by putting the Hippolytus story straight on to the stage, without any particular purging of its incidents. And the play somehow failed. Then he realized that what he wanted was a tragedy, and these tales in the first instance are not tragedies. They aim at entertainment, sometimes even at a snigger, rather than at tears or purgation of the soul. Hence the need of a second treatment of the subject, rejecting all that was small or mean, and concentrating on that which is great, simple, and of permanent human significance.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>